---
layout: single
author_profile: true
title: "How Democracies Die: In a Nutshell"
---

> My musings on the book of eponymous name by Steven Levitsky & Daniel Ziblatt

Though most of the book is dedicated to the rise of Trump and his threat to American democracy, it is a book full of cautionary tales and eye-opening ideas.

A key idea of the book is that democracies do not necessarily (and mostly no longer) die in a spectacular blaze (of bombs and bullets), but go in quiet revolutions. Outsiders gain popular support by posing as harbingers of change, promising deliverance from the vices of the existing political order to an increasingly frustrated people - the need of the hour.

The focal point of all arguments advanced is a litmus test to judge the authoritarian nature of candidates and office bearers. It's a simple, four pronged approach:

- Outright rejection of or weak commitment to democratic rules (of the game).
- Denying the legitimacy of political opponents.
- Tolerance or encouragement of violence.
- Readiness to curtail civil liberties of opponents (including the media).

These indicators feel uncomfortably familiar to me (and I'm sure to my peers as well) living in Modi's India. Instances that can be neatly shelved in one of these bins grow by the day.




Do they suggest a need for antidemocratic measures, such as canceling elections, violating or suspending the Constitution, banning certain organizations, or restricting basic civil or political rights?


Do they seek to use (or endorse the use of) extra-constitutional means to change the government, such as military coups, violent insurrections, or mass protests aimed at forcing a change in the government?


Do they attempt to undermine the legitimacy of elections, for example, by refusing to accept credible electoral results?


|:--------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------| 
| Rejection of (or weak commitment to)  | * Do they reject the Constitution or      |
| democratic rules of the game          |   express a willingness to violate it?    |
